Israel is considering how to respond to
Iran's attack Israeli War cabinet has
met twice since Saturday's aerial
assault but the government has yet to
announce any definite course of action
military Chief leftenant General hery
halevi has promised that Iran's
aggression will be met with a response
but Israeli media are reporting that
officials are looking for a calibrated
response that will hurt Iran without
triggering allout war world leaders have
repeatedly called for restraint here's a
look
at a long Shadow war that has come out
into the open with Iran's attack on
Israel over the weekend Israel's
government faces pressure from within
the country to strike back at Teran
forcefully to maintain
deterrence the highest risk and most
drastic step Israel could take would be
to strike at Iran's nuclear program that
could quickly lead to a major escalation
of the conflict Israel's sup expected to
have attacked Iran's uranium enrichment
facilities before including in 2010 with
a computer virus program that set Iran's
nuclear program back years but never
officially acknowledged it a step down
in intensity would be air strikes on
Iran's oil facilities military airports
or other military
facilities attacking oil targets might
significantly rattle the world economy
and attacks on Iran's military could
could force tyan to feel like it had to
respond again tit fortat attacks that
could lead to a regional
war in both cases there are military and
technical issues Israel's stock of
longrange ballistic missiles is low and
fighter jets would face a long and
complicated journey to their targets
raising the risk to Israel even
further a third option is no official
public reaction
but to instead take the shadow War back
into the Shadows Israel suspected to
have assassinated multiple Iranian
officials and nuclear researchers over
the past decade it also regularly
strikes at Iranian proxies in Syria and
Lebanon pushing retaliation into this
gray area without attacking Iranian soil
would likely allow Israel to avoid the
escalation its allies like the US have
been trying hard to contain
let's consider this with Gerald firin
who is a senior fellow at the Middle
East Institute in Philadelphia uh
welcome back to DW how do you read where
this conflict is now tit fat and honor
satisfied on both sides or has the
escalation ratchet been tightened even
[Music]
further it's a it's a pleasure to be
back with you I I think that it's a
little bit uh hard to see at this point
uh I think that the Iranian statement
after their attacks was that they've now
satisfied their uh their requirement to
uh to respond to the Israeli attack on
the uh on the consulate uh and now it's
the ball Israeli in back in the Israeli
Court uh we know what President Biden is
counseling uh he's said it publicly that
he has advised uh prime minister
Netanyahu uh to to take this opportunity
to declare Victory and go home if you
will but uh but it's not clear that the
Israelis will take that wise advice and
and write it down and if they don't then
once again you're in a situation where
uh it would be easy to get into a as you
said a tit fortat
scenario so if Israel chooses then to
respond just looking at the last 6
months um since October in its war
against Hamas Israel hasn't achieved its
stated goals of destroying Hamas and
rescuing the hostages so would a war
against a state like Iran be easier or
harder for Israel to prosecute and
win now the Israelis have no capacity to
prosecute a war against Iran without the
direct involvement of the United States
and President Biden has said that we
have absolutely no interest or desire uh
to uh to partner with uh with Israel on
such a mission uh and even for the US I
think that any kind of full military
assault on Iran would be a very
questionable uh Pro program process so
uh so the Israelis uh can certainly uh
do something that will sting Iran uh but
they cannot go beyond that you think
that would be a step too far for the
United States because you know the world
was pretty shocked about three weeks ago
when Benjamin Netanyahu um responded to
U us advice against going into Rafa by
saying um we will uh go in with or
without us support you think this is a
completely another level
entirely well uh again I I think that
there's a difference between uh
Netanyahu ignoring us advice uh a strong
us views which was certainly the casee
with Rafa and I would note that that
despite his rhetoric Netanyahu has not
taken that step yet uh but uh but again
uh without the active involvement of the
United States uh there is no Iran uh you
know prospect that Netanyahu has except
for relatively minor strik so uh so
there's a difference between uh ignoring
us guidance
uh and trying to do something that is
beyond his capability without the US
engagement what should we make of the
fact that this is the first time Iran
has attacked Israel directly rather than
through uh proxies what do you think
brought about this
change well I think it's a reflection of
the fact that Israel hit a uh an Iranian
diplomatic facility directly and in the
past of course uh uh there was a degree
of of Separation if you will an arms
length Association so the Israelis might
might hit a a Syrian Target or a
Lebanese Target but not uh an Iranian uh
you know a clearly marked Iranian
facility uh and I think that on that
basis the Iranians felt that they needed
to respond in like uh in like way that
uh that since the Israelis had crossed a
red line for them they needed to cross a
red line for Israel brief word about
sort of how this affects domestic
Israeli politics Benjamin netanyahu's
fragile coalition government was facing
criticism at home for its handling of
this war and for not getting the
hostages back and being criticized
abroad for the mounting death toll and
the humanitarian disaster it's causing
does this Iranian attack change any of
that I think in the short term uh of
course it's taken people's attention
away from uh the underlying issues in
Gaza humanitarian situation the you know
the uh the military operations uh but I
don't think that's a a long-term change
I think that once the U the issue of
Iran Fades uh that that the focus will
come back onto what's going on inside of
Gaza and popular support will will
return to a focus on that thank you for
that that assessment very clear Gerald
firin from the Middle East Institute in
Philadelphia well I asked a Middle East
analyst Aaron David Miller from the
carnegi Endowment for International
Peace for his thoughts on Israel's
likely next
move I think there will be a response U
even though the Iranian strikes um on
Saturday night caused very little damage
uh a new president was set a new
threshold was crossed new rules were
established uh and I think the Israelis
simply cannot afford to allow this to go
uh unchallenged uh this was the first
time in 33 years that another state uh
1991 it was Saddam Hussein who launched
43 scud missiles at is so I think there
will be an isra an Israeli response but
the reality is um I think your your
report uh covered several of the baskets
the timing of this the scale of it the
intensity of it I think think uh is
almost impossible to predict and you
pointed out quite correctly that it's
conceivable that the um response will be
covert um I suspect it'll be over but um
uh and most likely I would think against
conventional military
facilities right and so are we therefore
in an inevitable upward spiral of
tensions uh from this point or does at
some stage do do does each side peer
over the the the uh the The Edge and
look into the abyss and say all right
that's it that's
enough well I mean I I would say to you
that even if you get through this
current phase which is really quite
extraordinary the strategic competition
between Israel and Iran is not going to
end um none of the problems that fuel
this relationship Iran's efforts to push
US military out of uh out of the region
the fact that Iran is now a nuclear
weapons threshold State they have all
the elements um uh to make a a
deliverable nuclear nuclear device
should they decide to
weaponize and uh their efforts to
influence Regional developments through
their proxies none of this is going to
be solved and the Israelis clearly are
are going to try to establish
reestablish some measure measure of
deterrence um so I I I think no it is
not inevitable in fact if I had to make
a prediction I would say that we are not
headed toward what you and I would
describe as a regional war and let's be
clear that would almost invariably
trigger hezbollah's uh inventory of high
trajectory weapons which frankly unlike
drones roughly takes 12 to 15 minutes
for cruise missiles to travel the
distance from Iran to Israel has balas
got presan gued Munitions that could
cover most of the uh most of Israel and
there we're talking about minutes so I
think the Israelis want to avoid that um
but it remains to be seen whether or not
they can find a way basically to do what
Iran did which presumably is to
calculate a response between making this
qualitatively and quantitatively
different than anything the Iranians
have done before on one hand but not
courting or
triggering um a a response that would
escalate into a regional confrontation
and so how is Saturday's attack likely
to affect any hostage deal between
Israel and Hamas which of course is part
of Iran's so-called axis of
resistance yeah poorly I'm afraid uh I
think that Hamas y who is in some tunnel
somewhere meters below ground in kanun
or maybe according to Palestinian
sources maybe even in a tunnel tunnel
infrastructure in Egypt um I think sinir
is under no pressure no real urgency the
Israelis have basically wound down their
ground
campaign uh they've begun to facilitate
under us pressure more humanitarian
assistance that's important for Hamas to
maintain the postconflict
constituency among
Palestinians uh and I think senoir
understands that his insurance policy to
actually survive this uh depends on
retaining H so I think um and certainly
the is strike and you get an Israeli
Counter Strike Hamas has no interest
whatsoever they want to see this play
out they wanted on October 7 to Spur
Regional confr confrontation and
conflict if possible so they're not
under pressure and frankly the Neto
government as well uh I think isn't in
isn't in a hurry either despite the
pressure from understandable pressure
from aage families uh to release them
okay thank you for uh walking us through
that so clearly Aaron David Miller from
the Cari Endowment for International
Peace thank you so much thank
you well here in Germany the government
has strongly condemned Iran's attack on
Israel but Chancellor Olaf Schultz has
joined other European leaders in calling
on Israel to exercise restraint amid
growing concerns of a wider conflict in
the
region German Chancellor Olaf Schultz is
on a high-profile State visit to China
but now that has been overshadowed by
the risk of a large scale escalation in
the Middle East Schultz strongly
condemned Iran's air strikes this was a
very brutal Iranian attack it was
unprecedented and uh it was the first
time that
they used missiles to go directly
against the Israeli State this is
unacceptable but echoing other Western
calls for caution the chancellor also
urged Israel to deescalate the situation
back in Germany the opposition Christian
democrats said Berlin should be ready to
put its money where its mouth is when it
comes to support for
Israel if Israel is asking for armed and
AR Armament and ammunition from Germany
Germany should stay to its commitment
and deliver weapons to Israel to make
sure that Israel is able to defend
itself Germans are watching developments
in the region with concern
of course you worry about it but I try
not to think about it too
much they're all stubborn somewhere
along the line they can't manage to sit
around a table and say this is how we're
going to do
it it's
sad but unfortunately that's how it is
at the
moment but while diplomatic efforts to
resolve Israel's war with Hamas might
have dropped from the headlines the
German government says one of its top
priorities is to ensure that the
tensions between Iran and Israel don't
escalate into a new war